# Final Exam
**SA1.1** Male-male competition and female choice are both examples of what evolutionary mechanism? Explain both of these terms, making clear how they differ. Provide one example of a behavior for each
- Both are examples of sexual selection, selection based on traits related to mating.
- Male-male competition is competition between males for access to females. Sexually dimorphic species like gorillas, lead to physically larger males who are better able to compete.
- Female choice arose due to the time and energy required in raising offspring, compared to the male role. Female members of the species choose whom they mate with, so male members of the species who possess desirable traits (a tradeoff with making them more vulnerable to predators) are more likely to breed. For example, a peacock's tail is visually stunning in order to attract mates, although it may also attract predators.

**SA1.2** You are doing fieldwork in Chad in deposits that date to 6 million years old. You discover a partial skeleton that includes a complete skull, most of a pelvis, and the distal (knee) end of a femur. What features would you look for on these fossils to determine if this specimen was bipedal? Detail three features and provide a brief description of why each feature could indicate bipedalism.
- Anteriorly positioned foramen magnum - This is a hole in the cranium where the spinal cord and the brain connect. If the foramen magnum is anteriorly positioned, it indicates that the head is aligned vertically with the spinal cord compared to other great apes, lending balance and support during bipedal locomotion
- Bicondylar angled femur - In a gorilla, the femur is angled vertically, while in modern humans, it is angled inwards. This allows us to position the kneecaps towards the center of the body (a valgus knee), which moves our center of mass, helping us walk bipedally
- Laterally oriented iliac blades - Compared to chimpanzees, modern humans have a short and broad pelvis, with iliac blades that point outwards, instead of towards the back. This pelvis shaped lends support, as well as attachment points for muscles

**SA2.2.** You are a horse breeder, and you have bred together two black horses. Surprisingly, their offspring all have brown coats! If coat colour acts as a Mendelian (single gene) trait with only 2 possible alleles, what is the genotype of the black-coated parents? What was the genotype of the brown-coated offspring? If you wanted to be sure to get a brown horse, what coat-colour should the parents have? Without doing genetic testing, could you ever be sure of getting a horse with a black coat?
- The black-coated parents are both heterozygotes, with their genotype containing both the alleles for black-coats, and brown-coats
- Black-coats are the dominant allele over the brown-coat allele, so it is expressed in the black-coated parents
- The brown-coated offspring are both homozygotes, containing the recessive allele for brown-coats.
- In order to guarantee brown-coated offspring, both parents need to be brown-coats. Since it is the recessive allele, they would also be guaranteed to be homozygotes without the allele for black-coats.
- Without genetic testing, we likely wouldn’t be able to guarantee horse offspring with black-coats. We wouldn’t know if the parent has a repressive brown-coat allele in their genotype.

**SA2.3** There are two early hypotheses for human evolution: Brain First and Bipedalism First. Explain what they mean. When it was discovered, why was the Piltdown Man specimen thought to support the Brain First hypothesis for human evolution? Based on our knowledge of the fossil record today, which hypothesis is best supported: Brain First or Bipedalism first?
- Evolution is a slow process that takes place over a long period of time. Both larger cranial capacities and bipedalism are features that are unique to humans, however they cannot appear instantaneously. The Brain First and Bipedalism First try to hypothesize which feature came first.
- The Brain First hypothesis theorizes that since a large brain is modern human’s most distinctive feature, it would take a very long time to develop, and hence would have been evolving for a longer time than bipedalism
- The Bipedalism First hypothesis theorizes that by walking on their hindlimbs first, ancient humans were able to use their hands for other things, like tool usage, which led to a larger brain size
- Piltdown Man had a human-like cranial capacity, but the jaw fragments found were more ape-like. It seems to support the Brain First hypothesis, since this is a clear transitional species between the ancestral apes and modern humans, who had a human-like brain size.
- Our knowledge of the fossil record today supports the Bipedalism First hypothesis for human evolution. This is supported by the fossil remains of _Ardipithecus ramidus_, dated around 4.4 mya, whom had a chimp-sized brain (~300-350 cc), but showed some traits that supported bipedal locomotion. For example, it had an anteriorly positioned foramen magnum, which positions the head on top of the vetebral column.

**SA 2.4.** Is there any scientific support for the racial categorization of modern humans? Why or why not? What are 3 factors that influence human variation?
- There is no scientific support for racial categorization, as demonstrated in a study by Lewontin in 1972. He showed that most of human variation exists within groups, as compared to between human groups, contradicting the claims of the Race Model.
- Human variation is affected by the factors of endogamy, local adaptation, and gene flow.
- Endogamy is non-random mating within a group, with mate selection based on cultural or religious factors. It tends to make the members within the group similar to each other
- Local adaptation, such as skin colour based on the local climate. Light and dark skin colours have tradeoffs between protecting against UV rays for people living near the equator, versus increasing absorption of sunlight for people who live in colder climates
- Gene flow, through international travel, allows people from one population (i.e. America) to breed with people of other populations, bringing the two populations to become more similar.

**SA3.3.** Discuss two ways in which the use of “race” in modern medical practices is damaging to the health of Black patients
- Scientific studies use race as a bad proxy for other factors that should be properly measured, such as ancestry. For example, people who have a mixed background (European and African American) would identify themselves based on their social background, rather than their ancestral background. The race identified is used to make assumptions about the individual, such as their muscle mass, blinding them to other important factors, such as patient history and ancestry.
- Race becomes an overwhelming factor for doctors, leading to stereotypes and biases based on race. For example, Latino and African American patients are more likely to not receive painkillers, since they are assumed to feel less pain.
- Race based medicine leads to unequal quality in health care, such as medicine tested with a sample of patients within a minority group, and not being guaranteed to work with people outside the group. It makes assumptions that certain groups have substandard bodies based on their social identity instead of other unknown factors, that should be researched more carefully.