# The Domestication of Dogs
## Introduction
Throughout human history, artificial selection of plants and animals has vastly changed the evolutionary timeline of wildlife around the globe. Although symbiotic relationships between animals can be found in the wild, human domestication limits reproductive rights to individuals with traits that we find desirable (Zeder, 2012). Dogs are a clear example, with which humans have selectively bred for companionship and friendliness. However, there are many questions left unanswered about when and where domestic dogs first appeared, why early humans coexisted with them, and how the vast physiological differences in modern day dogs came to be.

## Origins of Dog Domestication
Early studies of dogs suggested that dogs descended from the Golden Jackal (Canis aureus), although we can now quite definitively conclude that dogs descended from the Gray Wolf (Canis lupus) (Morey, 2010). This is supported by genetic evidence, which found that the mitochondrial DNA of dogs differs from gray wolves by at most 0.2% (Wayne, 1993). As a result of this study, the classification of dogs changed from its own species Canis familiaris, to a subspecies of the gray wolf, Canis lupus familiaris (Morey, 2010).
  

Early humans have domesticated plants and animals for various reasons, although the domestication of dogs was likely not purposeful (Zeder, 2012). Dogs are believed to have followed a commensal path to domestication, where wild wolves who were less aggressive than other members of their pack, scavenged for food around human settlements (Zeder, 2012). Humans, about 15,000 years ago, were primarily hunter-gatherers and shared common prey with wolves, as well as both being social animals (Morey, 2010). As a result, wolves formed closer bonds with their human partners over time, which led to a pathway to domestication (Zeder, 2012). However, wolves were moving into a new environment, and differences in the environmental niche, combined with a shortened development cycle and population growth, led to the broad phenotypic changes we see today (Morey, 2010).

An issue that has puzzled researchers is whether dog domestication originated in a single location, or whether multiple human societies began domesticating dogs on their own. A study that has tried to answer this question, analyzed the proportion of haplotypes shared between dog breeds, and wild wolf populations in Europe, the Middle East, and China (Wayne et al., 2010). The Middle East and China were found to be likely candidates for origins of dog domestication where haplotype sharing was higher in comparison to other wolf populations (Wayne et al., 2010). Haplotype sharing was shown to be a lot lower in North American dogs, ruling out North America as a source of origin (Wayne et al., 2010). However, due to the vast geographical breadth of archaeological finds, multiple origins for dog domestication has been broadly accepted (Larson et al., 2012).

The commensal path to domestication has made it difficult for archaeologists to classify remains as either variation among wild wolves, or wolves in a transitional period to modern dogs. This is complicated by the different breeding cultures that may have taken place. One such documented culture selects for larger, stronger dogs, along with occasional interbreeding with wolves, which makes it easy to be mistaken for wolves (Morey, 2010). As such, even with the availability of various osteological techniques, it can be difficult to distinguish wolves from wolves undergoing domestication (Morey, 2010).

Our current understanding shows that dogs are primarily still wolves, with small changes to their developmental rates and timing being the main differentiating factor (Wayne, 1993). In the company of humans, dogs are able to grow slower early in life, and to stop growing earlier than their wolf counterparts (Morey, 2010). As a result, we see various morphological changes, including a reduction in size, a shortening of snout length, tooth crowding, and smaller, fewer teeth (Zeder, 2012).

Due to the difficulty in differentiating wolves from early dogs, the appearance of the first dogs is a contentious issue. Archaeological sites from the Late Pleistocene era in the Near East, suggest that the process of domestication started as early as about 15,000-14,000 years ago (Zeder, 2012). One such site known as Bonn-Oberkassel, contained the remains of a dog, which had been associated with a nearby human double grave (Morey, 2010). Although most of the remains went missing, statistical techniques were used to identify the remains as that of a dog rather than a wolf (Morey, 2010). Although the Bonn-Oberkassel dog is the oldest specimen that has been discovered, older dates for domestication have not been ruled out. Other studies using mitochondrial DNA, suggests that the timeline stretches much further, to about 100,000 years ago (Vila et al., 1997). This argument is supported by the appearance of mitochondrial DNA sequences that did not appear in wolves, although this evidence has been challenged (Vila et al., 1997).

## The Human-Dog Relationship
Over time, variation among the phenotypes of domesticated dogs increased, although the reasons behind it are hard to determine (Wayne et al., 2010). Mitochondrial DNA of several dog breeds were  found to diverge highly from other breeds, leading to the identification of several “ancient” dog breeds (Wayne et al., 2010). Occasional interbreeding between ancient dogs and wolves suggest these breeds originated much earlier than others (Wayne et al., 2010). In contrast, an increase in controlled breeding and artificial selection, with a reduction in cross-breeding with wolves, leads to greater variation in phenotypes among "modern" dog breeds we see today (Wayne et al., 2010). This is supported by the appearance of distinct genetic clusters within mitochondrial DNA of modern dog breeds, based on the phenotype or functions they provide to their human partners (Wayne et al., 2010).  

Early humans may have domesticated dogs for a variety of reasons. One of those reasons, for which solid evidence has been found, is as a source of food. Evidence for this comes from a site at Indian Knoll, Kentucky, dated to between 5,500 to 4,500 years ago, where dog bones were found intermingled with other animal bones, and with various cut marks from stone tools (Morey, 2010). However, the discovery of dog burials at the same site, throws into question what the roles of the dogs were (Morey, 2010). Dog eating is a practice that has continued to this day, hence it's not difficult to suggest that earlier humans were any different.

Another possible use for dogs may have been as transportation, either individually or in groups. Ethnohistoric sources indicate that the Assiniboine people in North America, tied pouches around the bodies of the dogs, in order to carry goods (Morey, 2010). Unfortunately, we cannot tell how far this practice stretches back in time. Dogs may have been used for hunting as well, although we can’t determine how far back in time for similar reasons (Morey, 2010). Some proponents of the “overkill hypothesis”, in which humans arrived in North America through the Bering Land Bridge 13,500 years ago, believed that dogs accompanied them, and took part in driving the megafauna in the area to extinction (Morey, 2010).

## Conclusion
Over the course of human history, dogs have vastly changed physiologically from their gray wolf origins. However, it can be noted that humans have changed alongside them. Domestication of dogs has led humans to domesticate many other species, including pigs, chicken, etc. as well as agriculture. Although there are still many unanswered questions about how our relationship with dogs started, humans may not be where we are today without them.

## Resources Cited
Larson, G., Karlsson, EK., Perri, A., Webster, MT., Hoe, SYW., Joris, P., Stahl, PW., Piper, PJ., Lingaas, F., Fredholm, M., Comstock, KE., Modiano, JF., Schelling, MC., Agoulnik, AI., Leegwater, PA., Dobney, K., Vigne, J-D., Vila, C., Andersson, L. and Lindblad-Toh, K. 2012. Rethinking dog domestication by integrating genetics, archaeology, and biogeography. PNAS 109: 8878-8883

Zeder, M.A. 2012. THE DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS. Journal of Anthropological Research 68, no. 2: 90-161.

Morey, D. 2013. Dogs: domestication and the development of a social bond. Cambridge University Press

Wayne, RK. 1993. Molecular evolution of the dog family. Trends Genet: 24-218.

Wayne, RK., VonHoldt, BM., Pollinger, JP., Lohmueller, KE., Han, E., Parker, HG., Quignon, P., Degenhardt, JD., Boyko, AR., Earl, Dent A., Auton, A., Reynolds, A., Bryc, K., Brisbin, A., Knowles, JC., Mosher, DS., Spady, TC., Elkahloun, A., Geffen, E., Pilot, M., Jedrzejewski, W., Greco, C., Randi, E., Bannasch, D., Wilton, A., Shearman, J., Musiani, M., Cargill, M., Jones, PG., Qian, Z., Huang, W., Ding, Z., Zhang, Y., Bustamante, CD., Ostrander, EA., Novembre, J. 2010. Genome-wide SNP and haplotype analyses reveal a rich history underlying dog domestication. Pp. 898+ in Nature, vol. 464, no. 7290.

Vila C., Savolainen, P., Maldonado, JE., Amorim, IR., Rice, JE., Honeycutt, RL., Crandall, KA., Lundeberg, J., Wayne, RK. 1997. Multiple and Ancient Origins of the Domestic Dog. Science 276.